README.md, before:

# GitHub Copilot Archetype Standards

A centralized repository containing development standards, coding guidelines, and GitHub Copilot configuration files for Python, Java, and Terraform projects.

## 📋 Table of Contents

- [Overview](#overview)
- [Repository Structure](#repository-structure)
- [How to Use](#how-to-use)
- [Archetype Standards](#archetype-standards)
- [GitHub Copilot Integration](#github-copilot-integration)
- [Testing the Configuration](#testing-the-configuration)
- [Contributing](#contributing)

## 🎯 Overview

This repository serves as a central source of truth for:

- **Organization-wide coding standards** across multiple languages
- **GitHub Copilot instruction files** that guide AI-assisted development
- **Reusable prompt templates** for common development tasks
- **Custom chat modes** for specialized development workflows
- **Language-specific style guides** for Python, Java, and Terraform

### Why This Repository?

GitHub Copilot custom instruction files, prompt files, and chat modes cannot be centrally managed, even in GitHub Enterprise Cloud (GHEC). This repository provides a workaround by:

1. Storing all standards and instructions in a central location
2. Allowing other repositories to reference these standards via Markdown links
3. Providing a consistent development experience across projects
4. Enabling easy updates that propagate to all referencing repositories

## 📁 Repository Structure

```
.
├── README.md
├── CONTRIBUTING.md                          # Guide for adding new content
├── .github/
│   ├── copilot-instructions.md              # Repository-wide high-level rules
│   ├── instructions/                        # Path-scoped instruction files
│   │   ├── global.instructions.md           # Archetype-agnostic global standards
│   │   ├── python.instructions.md           # Python 3.12+ standards
│   │   ├── java.instructions.md             # Java 21 LTS standards
│   │   └── terraform.instructions.md        # Terraform 1.13+ with Azure focus
│   ├── prompts/                             # Reusable prompt files with agent mode
│   │   ├── global.code-review.prompt.md     # Language-agnostic code review
│   │   ├── global.update-readme.prompt.md   # README generation/updates
│   │   ├── python.generate-tests.prompt.md  # pytest test generation
│   │   ├── python.review-security.prompt.md # Python OWASP security review
│   │   ├── java.generate-tests.prompt.md    # JUnit 5 test generation
│   │   ├── java.review-security.prompt.md   # Java OWASP security review
│   │   ├── terraform.generate-tests.prompt.md      # Terratest generation
│   │   └── terraform.azure.review-security.prompt.md  # Azure security review
│   ├── chatmodes/                           # Custom chat modes
│   │   ├── python.planner.chatmode.md       # Python strategic planning
│   │   ├── python.sec-reviewer.chatmode.md  # Python security review
│   │   ├── java.planner.chatmode.md         # Java strategic planning
│   │   ├── java.sec-reviewer.chatmode.md    # Java security review
│   │   ├── terraform.planner.chatmode.md    # Infrastructure planning
│   │   └── terraform.sec-reviewer.chatmode.md  # Terraform security review
│   └── toolsets/                            # Tool documentation
│       └── development.toolset.md           # search, usages, githubRepo tools
```

### File Types and Purposes

#### `.github/copilot-instructions.md`
- **Purpose**: Repository-wide high-level coding rules
- **Scope**: Automatically applied to entire repository
- **Support**: VS Code, GitHub Copilot

#### `.github/instructions/*.instructions.md`
- **Purpose**: Language or path-specific instructions
- **Scope**: Applied to files matching `applyTo` glob patterns
- **Support**: VS Code, Coding Agent
- **Format**: Front matter with `applyTo` and `description` fields

#### `.github/prompts/*.prompt.md`
- **Purpose**: Reusable prompt templates for common tasks with active agent capabilities
- **Scope**: Workspace or user-scoped
- **Support**: GitHub Copilot Chat
- **Format**: Front matter with `mode: 'agent'`, `description`, and `tools` fields
- **Tools**: Uses `search`, `usages`, and `githubRepo` for active code analysis
- **Usage**: Can actively search codebase, trace dependencies, and analyze repository context
- **Features**: 
  - **Migration Planning**: Analyzes codebase structure, identifies dependencies, and generates phased migration plans
  - **Security Review**: Scans for OWASP Top 10 vulnerabilities with language-specific checks
  - **Test Generation (Python)**: Creates comprehensive pytest test suites with fixtures and mocks
  - **Test Generation (Java)**: Creates JUnit 5 test suites with Mockito and AssertJ
  - **Test Generation (Terraform)**: Creates validation scripts and Terratest integration tests

#### `.github/chatmodes/*.chatmode.md`
- **Purpose**: Custom chat modes for specialized workflows
- **Scope**: Workspace-scoped
- **Support**: GitHub Copilot Chat
- **Format**: Front matter with `description` and `tools` fields
- **Usage**: Can reference instruction files via Markdown links 

#### `.github/toolsets/*.toolset.md`
- **Purpose**: Documentation of available tools (search, usages, githubRepo)
- **Scope**: Workspace-scoped
- **Support**: GitHub Copilot Chat
- **Format**: Front matter with `description` field
- **Usage**: Reference guide for effective tool usage in prompts and chat modes

## 🚀 How to Use

### Option 1: Direct Integration (Recommended)

Copy the `.github` directory structure into your project repository:

```bash
# Clone this repository
git clone https://github.com/Pwd9000-ML/copilot-archetype-standards.git

# Copy .github directory to your project
cp -r copilot-archetype-standards/.github /path/to/your/project/


```

### Option 2: Reference via Markdown Links (Experimental)

Create lightweight instruction files in your project that reference this central repository:

**Example: `.github/copilot-instructions.md` in your project**
```markdown
# Project Copilot Instructions

This project follows the organization-wide standards defined in the central repository:

- [Organization Copilot Guidelines](https://github.com/Pwd9000-ML/copilot-archetype-standards/tree/master/.github/copilot-instructions.md)

## Language-Specific Instructions

- [Python Standards](https://github.com/Pwd9000-ML/copilot-archetype-standards/tree/master/.github/instructions/python.instructions.md)
- [Java Standards](https://github.com/Pwd9000-ML/copilot-archetype-standards/tree/master/.github/instructions/java.instructions.md)
- [Terraform Standards](https://github.com/Pwd9000-ML/copilot-archetype-standards/tree/master/.github/instructions/terraform.instructions.md)

## Project-Specific Guidelines

[Add any project-specific guidelines here]
```

**Note**: The effectiveness of Option 2 depends on GitHub Copilot's ability to follow external links. Test thoroughly in your environment.

### Option 3: Git Submodule

Add this repository as a submodule to reference it directly:

```bash
cd /path/to/your/project
git submodule add https://github.com/Pwd9000-ML/copilot-archetype-standards.git standards
git commit -m "Add copilot standards as submodule"
```

Then create symlinks or reference the files:
```bash
ln -s standards/.github/copilot-instructions.md .github/copilot-instructions.md
```

## 📚 Archetype Standards

### Python Archetype

- Python >=3.12 with type hints everywhere
- Linting with `ruff`, formatting with `black` (120 columns)
- Testing with `pytest` under `tests/` directory
**Key Standards:**
\
See: [Python Instructions](https://github.com/Pwd9000-ML/copilot-archetype-standards/tree/master/.github/instructions/python.instructions.md)

**Example Project Structure:**
```
python-project/
├── src/
│   └── myapp/
│       ├── __init__.py
│       └── main.py
├── tests/
│   └── test_main.py
├── pyproject.toml
├── .github/
│   └── copilot-instructions.md
└── README.md
```

### Java Archetype

- Java 17 LTS or later (Java 21 LTS recommended)
- Google Java Style Guide with `google-java-format`
- Testing with JUnit 5 and AssertJ
- Build with Gradle or Maven
**Key Standards:**
\
See: [Java Instructions](https://github.com/Pwd9000-ML/copilot-archetype-standards/tree/master/.github/instructions/java.instructions.md)

**Example Project Structure:**
```
java-project/
├── src/
│   ├── main/java/
│   │   └── com/example/myapp/
│   └── test/java/
│       └── com/example/myapp/
├── build.gradle
├── .github/
│   └── copilot-instructions.md
└── README.md
```

### Terraform Archetype

- Terraform >= 1.6.0 with pinned provider versions
- Format with `terraform fmt`, lint with `tflint`
- Security scanning with `tfsec` or `checkov`
- Remote state with encryption enabled
**Key Standards:**
\
See: [Terraform Instructions](https://github.com/Pwd9000-ML/copilot-archetype-standards/tree/master/.github/instructions/terraform.instructions.md)

**Example Project Structure:**
```
terraform-project/
├── main.tf
├── variables.tf
├── outputs.tf
├── versions.tf
├── modules/
├── .github/
│   └── copilot-instructions.md
└── README.md
```

## 🤖 GitHub Copilot Integration

### VS Code Integration

1. **Install GitHub Copilot Extension**: Ensure GitHub Copilot is installed and activated in VS Code

2. **Instruction Files**: Place instruction files in `.github/instructions/` with proper front matter:
   ```markdown
   ---
   applyTo: "**/*.py"
   description: Python rules
   ---
   ```

3. **Prompt Files**: Save prompt files in `.github/prompts/` and access via Copilot Chat

4. **Chat Modes**: Define custom chat modes in `.github/chatmodes/` for specialized workflows

### How Copilot Uses These Files

- **copilot-instructions.md**: Automatically loaded for all Copilot interactions in the repository
- **instructions/*.instructions.md**: Applied to files matching the `applyTo` glob pattern
- **prompts/*.prompt.md**: Available as reusable prompts in Copilot Chat
- **chatmodes/*.chatmode.md**: Activate specialized modes for focused development tasks

### Example Copilot Workflows with Agent Mode

Our prompt files use **agent mode** with active tool capabilities for enhanced code analysis:

**Security Review (Agent Mode - Language Specific):**
1. Select code to review or specify a directory
2. Open Copilot Chat
3. Reference the appropriate archetype:
   - Python: `/prompt python.review-security`
   - Java: `/prompt java.review-security`
   - Terraform: `/prompt terraform.azure.review-security`
4. Agent actively:
   - Searches codebase for security patterns
   - Traces data flows using `usages` analysis
   - Scans dependencies for vulnerabilities
   - Provides specific findings with file locations
5. Examples:
   - Python: `"Review the authentication module in /src/auth for OWASP Top 10 vulnerabilities"`
   - Java: `"Review Spring Security configuration for security misconfigurations"`
   - Terraform: `"Review Azure infrastructure for public exposure and weak encryption"`

**Generate Tests (Agent Mode - Archetype Specific):**
1. Select function/class to test
2. Open Copilot Chat
3. Reference the appropriate archetype:
   - Python: `/prompt generate-tests-python`
   - Java: `/prompt generate-tests-java`
   - Terraform: `/prompt generate-tests-terraform`
4. Agent actively:
   - Analyzes code structure and all code paths
   - Finds existing test patterns in your repository
   - Identifies dependencies to mock
   - Generates tests matching your project style
5. Examples:
   - Python: `"Generate comprehensive tests for UserService with >90% coverage"`
   - Java: `"Generate JUnit 5 tests for OrderService class with Mockito mocks"`
   - Terraform: `"Generate Terratest for the networking module with validation scripts"`

**Code Review (Agent Mode - Universal):**
1. Select code or files to review
2. Open Copilot Chat
3. Reference: `/prompt global.code-review`
4. Agent actively:
   - Searches for similar patterns in your codebase
   - Traces code dependencies and usage
   - Identifies code smells and anti-patterns
   - Provides prioritized, actionable feedback
5. Example: `"Review the OrderService class for code quality, performance, and maintainability"`

**Benefits of Agent Mode:**
- **Active Analysis**: Prompts don't just provide templates - they actively analyze your code
- **Context-Aware**: Uses repository structure and existing patterns
- **Data-Driven**: Provides specific file locations, usage counts, and metrics
- **Customized Output**: Generates plans specific to your codebase, not generic advice

### Understanding Development Tools

All agent-mode prompts and chat modes use three powerful tools for code analysis:

- **`search`**: Find files, symbols, patterns, and code throughout your codebase
- **`usages`**: Trace how functions, classes, and symbols are used
- **`githubRepo`**: Access repository metadata, structure, and history

For detailed documentation on how to use these tools effectively, see:
[Development Toolset Guide](https://github.com/Pwd9000-ML/copilot-archetype-standards/tree/master/.github/toolsets/development.toolset.md)

## 🧪 Testing the Configuration

### Test Plan for Referenced Instructions

To verify whether GitHub Copilot follows instructions from external repositories:

#### Setup Test Repositories

1. **Create archetype-specific empty repositories:**
   - `python-test-archetype`
   - `java-test-archetype`
   - `terraform-test-archetype`

2. **Add minimal instruction files** that reference this central repository

3. **Test Copilot behavior** in each repository

#### Test Cases

**Test 1: Instruction Following**
- Create a Python file in `python-test-archetype`
- Ask Copilot to create a function
- Verify: Does it use type hints? Black formatting? pytest conventions?

**Test 2: Prompt Application**
- Select code in any test repository
- Use security review prompt
- Verify: Does Copilot follow OWASP Top 10 checklist?

**Test 3: Cross-Reference**
- Ask Copilot about coding standards
- Verify: Does it reference the central repository instruction files?

**Test 4: Updates Propagation**
- Update central repository instructions
- Test in archetype repositories
- Verify: Do changes take effect immediately or need cache clear?

#### Testing Procedure

```bash
# 1. Create test repository
mkdir python-test-archetype && cd python-test-archetype
git init

# 2. Add minimal reference file
mkdir -p .github
cat > .github/copilot-instructions.md << 'EOF'
# Python Project Standards

Follow organization standards: 
https://github.com/Pwd9000-ML/copilot-archetype-standards/tree/master/.github/instructions/python.instructions.md


EOF

# 3. Create test file
cat > test.py << 'EOF'
# Ask Copilot to create a function that calculates factorial
EOF

# 4. Open in VS Code and test with Copilot
code .
```

### Expected Results

| Test | Expected Behavior | Pass/Fail |
|------|------------------|-----------|
| Type hints usage | Copilot suggests type hints | ✅ / ❌ |
| Code formatting | 120 char line length | ✅ / ❌ |
| Test generation | pytest format with fixtures | ✅ / ❌ |
| Security review | OWASP checklist applied | ✅ / ❌ |

### Testing in Your Environment

1. **Clone this repository** to your organization
2. **Create test repositories** for each archetype
3. **Follow the testing procedure** above
4. **Document results** in your environment
5. **Choose integration method** based on test results

## 🤝 Contributing

We welcome contributions! This repository provides standardized templates and guidelines for adding new content.

### Quick Start

1. **Read the [CONTRIBUTING.md](https://github.com/Pwd9000-ML/copilot-archetype-standards/tree/master/CONTRIBUTING.md) guide** for detailed instructions
2. **Fork this repository**
3. **Create a feature branch**: `git checkout -b feature/your-feature`
4. **Make your changes** following the templates and conventions
5. **Test your changes** in VS Code with GitHub Copilot
6. **Submit a pull request** with a clear description

### What You Can Add

- **Instruction Files**: Language or framework-specific standards (`.github/instructions/`)
- **Prompt Files**: Reusable templates for common tasks (`.github/prompts/`)
- **Chat Modes**: Specialized development workflows (`.github/chatmodes/`)

- **Toolsets**: Documentation for development tools (`.github/toolsets/`)

### File Naming Conventions

| Type | Format | Example |
|------|--------|---------|
| Instruction | `{language}.instructions.md` | `python.instructions.md` |
| Prompt | `{scope}.{purpose}.prompt.md` | `python.generate-tests.prompt.md` |
| Chat Mode | `{language}.{mode}.chatmode.md` | `java.planner.chatmode.md` |

| Toolset | `{category}.toolset.md` | `development.toolset.md` |

### Front Matter Standards

All files must include proper YAML front matter. See [CONTRIBUTING.md](https://github.com/Pwd9000-ML/copilot-archetype-standards/tree/master/CONTRIBUTING.md) for templates and examples.

### Testing Your Changes

Before submitting:
- ✅ Validate YAML front matter
- ✅ Check markdown formatting
- ✅ Verify all links use full GitHub URLs
- ✅ Test in VS Code with GitHub Copilot
- ✅ Compare with existing similar files

### Adding New Archetypes

To add a new language archetype:

1. Create instruction file: `.github/instructions/{language}.instructions.md`
2. Create prompt files: `.github/prompts/{language}.*.prompt.md`
3. Create chat modes: `.github/chatmodes/{language}.*.chatmode.md`
4. Update this README with archetype information
5. Add examples and usage documentation

## 📖 Additional Resources

### GitHub Copilot Documentation
- [GitHub Copilot Documentation](https://docs.github.com/en/copilot)
- [Copilot Chat Documentation](https://docs.github.com/en/copilot/github-copilot-chat)
- [Custom Instructions](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/copilot/copilot-customization)

### Security Resources
- [OWASP Top 10](https://owasp.org/www-project-top-ten/)
- [CWE Top 25](https://cwe.mitre.org/top25/)
- [NIST Cybersecurity Framework](https://www.nist.gov/cyberframework)

## 📄 License

This project is licensed under the terms of the LICENSE file in the root directory.

## 🙋 Support

For questions or issues:
- Open an issue in this repository
- Contact @Pwd9000-ML on GitHub
- Review existing discussions and documentation

---

**Last Updated**: 2025-10-23  
**Maintained By**: @Pwd9000-ML

Commit message:

docs: remove toolset documentation section and update usage examples for prompts

README.md, after:

# GitHub Copilot Archetype Standards

A centralized repository containing development standards, coding guidelines, and GitHub Copilot configuration files for Python, Java, and Terraform projects.

## 📋 Table of Contents

- [Overview](#overview)
- [Repository Structure](#repository-structure)
- [How to Use](#how-to-use)
- [Archetype Standards](#archetype-standards)
- [GitHub Copilot Integration](#github-copilot-integration)
- [Testing the Configuration](#testing-the-configuration)
- [Contributing](#contributing)

## 🎯 Overview

This repository serves as a central source of truth for:

- **Organization-wide coding standards** across multiple languages
- **GitHub Copilot instruction files** that guide AI-assisted development
- **Reusable prompt templates** for common development tasks
- **Custom chat modes** for specialized development workflows
- **Language-specific style guides** for Python, Java, and Terraform

### Why This Repository?

GitHub Copilot custom instruction files, prompt files, and chat modes cannot be centrally managed, even in GitHub Enterprise Cloud (GHEC). This repository provides a workaround by:

1. Storing all standards and instructions in a central location
2. Allowing other repositories to reference these standards via Markdown links
3. Providing a consistent development experience across projects
4. Enabling easy updates that propagate to all referencing repositories

## 📁 Repository Structure

```
.
├── README.md
├── CONTRIBUTING.md                          # Guide for adding new content
├── .github/
│   ├── copilot-instructions.md              # Repository-wide high-level rules
│   ├── instructions/                        # Path-scoped instruction files
│   │   ├── global.instructions.md           # Archetype-agnostic global standards
│   │   ├── python.instructions.md           # Python 3.12+ standards
│   │   ├── java.instructions.md             # Java 21 LTS standards
│   │   └── terraform.instructions.md        # Terraform 1.13+ with Azure focus
│   ├── prompts/                             # Reusable prompt files with agent mode
│   │   ├── global.code-review.prompt.md     # Language-agnostic code review
│   │   ├── global.update-readme.prompt.md   # README generation/updates
│   │   ├── python.generate-tests.prompt.md  # pytest test generation
│   │   ├── python.review-security.prompt.md # Python OWASP security review
│   │   ├── java.generate-tests.prompt.md    # JUnit 5 test generation
│   │   ├── java.review-security.prompt.md   # Java OWASP security review
│   │   ├── terraform.generate-tests.prompt.md      # Terratest generation
│   │   └── terraform.azure.review-security.prompt.md  # Azure security review
│   ├── chatmodes/                           # Custom chat modes
│   │   ├── python.planner.chatmode.md       # Python strategic planning
│   │   ├── python.sec-reviewer.chatmode.md  # Python security review
│   │   ├── java.planner.chatmode.md         # Java strategic planning
│   │   ├── java.sec-reviewer.chatmode.md    # Java security review
│   │   ├── terraform.planner.chatmode.md    # Infrastructure planning
│   │   └── terraform.sec-reviewer.chatmode.md  # Terraform security review
│   
```

### File Types and Purposes

#### `.github/copilot-instructions.md`
- **Purpose**: Repository-wide high-level coding rules
- **Scope**: Automatically applied to entire repository
- **Support**: VS Code, GitHub Copilot

#### `.github/instructions/*.instructions.md`
- **Purpose**: Language or path-specific instructions
- **Scope**: Applied to files matching `applyTo` glob patterns
- **Support**: VS Code, Coding Agent
- **Format**: Front matter with `applyTo` and `description` fields

#### `.github/prompts/*.prompt.md`
- **Purpose**: Reusable prompt templates for common tasks with active agent capabilities
- **Scope**: Workspace or user-scoped
- **Support**: GitHub Copilot Chat
- **Format**: Front matter with `mode: 'agent'`, `description`, and `tools` fields
- **Tools**: Uses `search`, `usages`, and `githubRepo` for active code analysis
- **Usage**: Can actively search codebase, trace dependencies, and analyze repository context
- **Features**: 
  - **Migration Planning**: Analyzes codebase structure, identifies dependencies, and generates phased migration plans
  - **Security Review**: Scans for OWASP Top 10 vulnerabilities with language-specific checks
  - **Test Generation (Python)**: Creates comprehensive pytest test suites with fixtures and mocks
  - **Test Generation (Java)**: Creates JUnit 5 test suites with Mockito and AssertJ
  - **Test Generation (Terraform)**: Creates validation scripts and Terratest integration tests

#### `.github/chatmodes/*.chatmode.md`
- **Purpose**: Custom chat modes for specialized workflows
- **Scope**: Workspace-scoped
- **Support**: GitHub Copilot Chat
- **Format**: Front matter with `description` and `tools` fields
- **Usage**: Can reference instruction files via Markdown links 

## 🚀 How to Use

### Option 1: Direct Integration (Recommended)

Copy the `.github` directory structure into your project repository:

```bash
# Clone this repository
git clone https://github.com/Pwd9000-ML/copilot-archetype-standards.git

# Copy .github directory to your project
cp -r copilot-archetype-standards/.github /path/to/your/project/


```

### Option 2: Reference via Markdown Links (Experimental)

Create lightweight instruction files in your project that reference this central repository:

**Example: `.github/copilot-instructions.md` in your project**
```markdown
# Project Copilot Instructions

This project follows the organization-wide standards defined in the central repository:

- [Organization Copilot Guidelines](https://github.com/Pwd9000-ML/copilot-archetype-standards/tree/master/.github/copilot-instructions.md)

## Language-Specific Instructions

- [Python Standards](https://github.com/Pwd9000-ML/copilot-archetype-standards/tree/master/.github/instructions/python.instructions.md)
- [Java Standards](https://github.com/Pwd9000-ML/copilot-archetype-standards/tree/master/.github/instructions/java.instructions.md)
- [Terraform Standards](https://github.com/Pwd9000-ML/copilot-archetype-standards/tree/master/.github/instructions/terraform.instructions.md)

## Project-Specific Guidelines

[Add any project-specific guidelines here]
```

**Note**: The effectiveness of Option 2 depends on GitHub Copilot's ability to follow external links. Test thoroughly in your environment.

### Option 3: Git Submodule

Add this repository as a submodule to reference it directly:

```bash
cd /path/to/your/project
git submodule add https://github.com/Pwd9000-ML/copilot-archetype-standards.git standards
git commit -m "Add copilot standards as submodule"
```

Then create symlinks or reference the files:
```bash
ln -s standards/.github/copilot-instructions.md .github/copilot-instructions.md
```

## 📚 Archetype Standards

### Python Archetype

- Python >=3.12 with type hints everywhere
- Linting with `ruff`, formatting with `black` (120 columns)
- Testing with `pytest` under `tests/` directory
**Key Standards:**
\
See: [Python Instructions](https://github.com/Pwd9000-ML/copilot-archetype-standards/tree/master/.github/instructions/python.instructions.md)

**Example Project Structure:**
```
python-project/
├── src/
│   └── myapp/
│       ├── __init__.py
│       └── main.py
├── tests/
│   └── test_main.py
├── pyproject.toml
├── .github/
│   └── copilot-instructions.md
└── README.md
```

### Java Archetype

- Java 17 LTS or later (Java 21 LTS recommended)
- Google Java Style Guide with `google-java-format`
- Testing with JUnit 5 and AssertJ
- Build with Gradle or Maven
**Key Standards:**
\
See: [Java Instructions](https://github.com/Pwd9000-ML/copilot-archetype-standards/tree/master/.github/instructions/java.instructions.md)

**Example Project Structure:**
```
java-project/
├── src/
│   ├── main/java/
│   │   └── com/example/myapp/
│   └── test/java/
│       └── com/example/myapp/
├── build.gradle
├── .github/
│   └── copilot-instructions.md
└── README.md
```

### Terraform Archetype

- Terraform >= 1.6.0 with pinned provider versions
- Format with `terraform fmt`, lint with `tflint`
- Security scanning with `tfsec` or `checkov`
- Remote state with encryption enabled
**Key Standards:**
\
See: [Terraform Instructions](https://github.com/Pwd9000-ML/copilot-archetype-standards/tree/master/.github/instructions/terraform.instructions.md)

**Example Project Structure:**
```
terraform-project/
├── main.tf
├── variables.tf
├── outputs.tf
├── versions.tf
├── modules/
├── .github/
│   └── copilot-instructions.md
└── README.md
```

## 🤖 GitHub Copilot Integration

### VS Code Integration

1. **Install GitHub Copilot Extension**: Ensure GitHub Copilot is installed and activated in VS Code

2. **Instruction Files**: Place instruction files in `.github/instructions/` with proper front matter:
   ```markdown
   ---
   applyTo: "**/*.py"
   description: Python rules
   ---
   ```

3. **Prompt Files**: Save prompt files in `.github/prompts/` and access via Copilot Chat

4. **Chat Modes**: Define custom chat modes in `.github/chatmodes/` for specialized workflows

### How Copilot Uses These Files

- **copilot-instructions.md**: Automatically loaded for all Copilot interactions in the repository
- **instructions/*.instructions.md**: Applied to files matching the `applyTo` glob pattern
- **prompts/*.prompt.md**: Available as reusable prompts in Copilot Chat
- **chatmodes/*.chatmode.md**: Activate specialized modes for focused development tasks

### Example Copilot Workflows with Agent Mode

Our prompt files use **agent mode** with active tool capabilities for enhanced code analysis:

**Security Review (Agent Mode - Language Specific):**
1. Select code to review or specify a directory
2. Open Copilot Chat
3. Reference the appropriate archetype:
   - Python: `/prompt python.review-security`
   - Java: `/prompt java.review-security`
   - Terraform: `/prompt terraform.azure.review-security`
4. Agent actively:
   - Searches codebase for security patterns
   - Traces data flows using `usages` analysis
   - Scans dependencies for vulnerabilities
   - Provides specific findings with file locations
5. Examples:
   - Python: `"Review the authentication module in /src/auth for OWASP Top 10 vulnerabilities"`
   - Java: `"Review Spring Security configuration for security misconfigurations"`
   - Terraform: `"Review Azure infrastructure for public exposure and weak encryption"`

**Generate Tests (Agent Mode - Archetype Specific):**
1. Select function/class to test
2. Open Copilot Chat
3. Reference the appropriate archetype:
   - Python: `/prompt generate-tests-python`
   - Java: `/prompt generate-tests-java`
   - Terraform: `/prompt generate-tests-terraform`
4. Agent actively:
   - Analyzes code structure and all code paths
   - Finds existing test patterns in your repository
   - Identifies dependencies to mock
   - Generates tests matching your project style
5. Examples:
   - Python: `"Generate comprehensive tests for UserService with >90% coverage"`
   - Java: `"Generate JUnit 5 tests for OrderService class with Mockito mocks"`
   - Terraform: `"Generate Terratest for the networking module with validation scripts"`

**Code Review (Agent Mode - Universal):**
1. Select code or files to review
2. Open Copilot Chat
3. Reference: `/prompt global.code-review`
4. Agent actively:
   - Searches for similar patterns in your codebase
   - Traces code dependencies and usage
   - Identifies code smells and anti-patterns
   - Provides prioritized, actionable feedback
5. Example: `"Review the OrderService class for code quality, performance, and maintainability"`

**Benefits of Agent Mode:**
- **Active Analysis**: Prompts don't just provide templates - they actively analyze your code
- **Context-Aware**: Uses repository structure and existing patterns
- **Data-Driven**: Provides specific file locations, usage counts, and metrics
- **Customized Output**: Generates plans specific to your codebase, not generic advice

### Understanding Development Tools

All agent-mode prompts and chat modes use three powerful tools for code analysis:

- **`search`**: Find files, symbols, patterns, and code throughout your codebase
- **`usages`**: Trace how functions, classes, and symbols are used
- **`githubRepo`**: Access repository metadata, structure, and history

For examples of how these tools are used in practice, see these prompts:
- Global Code Review: https://github.com/Pwd9000-ML/copilot-archetype-standards/tree/master/.github/prompts/global.code-review.prompt.md
- Python Generate Tests: https://github.com/Pwd9000-ML/copilot-archetype-standards/tree/master/.github/prompts/python.generate-tests.prompt.md
- Java Generate Tests: https://github.com/Pwd9000-ML/copilot-archetype-standards/tree/master/.github/prompts/java.generate-tests.prompt.md
- Terraform Generate Tests: https://github.com/Pwd9000-ML/copilot-archetype-standards/tree/master/.github/prompts/terraform.generate-tests.prompt.md

## 🧪 Testing the Configuration

### Test Plan for Referenced Instructions

To verify whether GitHub Copilot follows instructions from external repositories:

#### Setup Test Repositories

1. **Create archetype-specific empty repositories:**
   - `python-test-archetype`
   - `java-test-archetype`
   - `terraform-test-archetype`

2. **Add minimal instruction files** that reference this central repository

3. **Test Copilot behavior** in each repository

#### Test Cases

**Test 1: Instruction Following**
- Create a Python file in `python-test-archetype`
- Ask Copilot to create a function
- Verify: Does it use type hints? Black formatting? pytest conventions?

**Test 2: Prompt Application**
- Select code in any test repository
- Use security review prompt
- Verify: Does Copilot follow OWASP Top 10 checklist?

**Test 3: Cross-Reference**
- Ask Copilot about coding standards
- Verify: Does it reference the central repository instruction files?

**Test 4: Updates Propagation**
- Update central repository instructions
- Test in archetype repositories
- Verify: Do changes take effect immediately or need cache clear?

#### Testing Procedure

```bash
# 1. Create test repository
mkdir python-test-archetype && cd python-test-archetype
git init

# 2. Add minimal reference file
mkdir -p .github
cat > .github/copilot-instructions.md << 'EOF'
# Python Project Standards

Follow organization standards: 
https://github.com/Pwd9000-ML/copilot-archetype-standards/tree/master/.github/instructions/python.instructions.md


EOF

# 3. Create test file
cat > test.py << 'EOF'
# Ask Copilot to create a function that calculates factorial
EOF

# 4. Open in VS Code and test with Copilot
code .
```

### Expected Results

| Test | Expected Behavior | Pass/Fail |
|------|------------------|-----------|
| Type hints usage | Copilot suggests type hints | ✅ / ❌ |
| Code formatting | 120 char line length | ✅ / ❌ |
| Test generation | pytest format with fixtures | ✅ / ❌ |
| Security review | OWASP checklist applied | ✅ / ❌ |

### Testing in Your Environment

1. **Clone this repository** to your organization
2. **Create test repositories** for each archetype
3. **Follow the testing procedure** above
4. **Document results** in your environment
5. **Choose integration method** based on test results

## 🤝 Contributing

We welcome contributions! This repository provides standardized templates and guidelines for adding new content.

### Quick Start

1. **Read the [CONTRIBUTING.md](https://github.com/Pwd9000-ML/copilot-archetype-standards/tree/master/CONTRIBUTING.md) guide** for detailed instructions
2. **Fork this repository**
3. **Create a feature branch**: `git checkout -b feature/your-feature`
4. **Make your changes** following the templates and conventions
5. **Test your changes** in VS Code with GitHub Copilot
6. **Submit a pull request** with a clear description

### What You Can Add

- **Instruction Files**: Language or framework-specific standards (`.github/instructions/`)
- **Prompt Files**: Reusable templates for common tasks (`.github/prompts/`)
- **Chat Modes**: Specialized development workflows (`.github/chatmodes/`)
0
### File Naming Conventions

| Type | Format | Example |
|------|--------|---------|
| Instruction | `{language}.instructions.md` | `python.instructions.md` |
| Prompt | `{scope}.{purpose}.prompt.md` | `python.generate-tests.prompt.md` |
| Chat Mode | `{language}.{mode}.chatmode.md` | `java.planner.chatmode.md` |

### Front Matter Standards

All files must include proper YAML front matter. See [CONTRIBUTING.md](https://github.com/Pwd9000-ML/copilot-archetype-standards/tree/master/CONTRIBUTING.md) for templates and examples.

### Testing Your Changes

Before submitting:
- ✅ Validate YAML front matter
- ✅ Check markdown formatting
- ✅ Verify all links use full GitHub URLs
- ✅ Test in VS Code with GitHub Copilot
- ✅ Compare with existing similar files

### Adding New Archetypes

To add a new language archetype:

1. Create instruction file: `.github/instructions/{language}.instructions.md`
2. Create prompt files: `.github/prompts/{language}.*.prompt.md`
3. Create chat modes: `.github/chatmodes/{language}.*.chatmode.md`
4. Update this README with archetype information
5. Add examples and usage documentation

## 📖 Additional Resources

### GitHub Copilot Documentation
- [GitHub Copilot Documentation](https://docs.github.com/en/copilot)
- [Copilot Chat Documentation](https://docs.github.com/en/copilot/github-copilot-chat)
- [Custom Instructions](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/copilot/copilot-customization)

### Security Resources
- [OWASP Top 10](https://owasp.org/www-project-top-ten/)
- [CWE Top 25](https://cwe.mitre.org/top25/)
- [NIST Cybersecurity Framework](https://www.nist.gov/cyberframework)

## 📄 License

This project is licensed under the terms of the LICENSE file in the root directory.

## 🙋 Support

For questions or issues:
- Open an issue in this repository
- Contact @Pwd9000-ML on GitHub
- Review existing discussions and documentation

---

**Last Updated**: 2025-10-23  
**Maintained By**: @Pwd9000-ML
